Pompeo praises ‘US ally’ Denmark after Trump cancels visit
22 August 2019

In a phone call with Danish Foreign Minister Jeppe Kofod, Mr Pompeo "expressed appreciation for Denmark's co-operation" as a US ally.

Mr Kofod welcomed the "frank, friendly and constructive talk".

It came after Mr Trump said Denmark's prime minister had been "nasty" when rebuffing his idea of buying Greenland.

Mette Frederiksen had called his ambitions of buying the autonomous Danish territory "absurd". She said she was "disappointed and surprised" that he had cancelled his visit.

The trip was scheduled to take place on 2 September, at the invitation of Denmark's Queen Margrethe II.

Greenland: What you need to know
Why would Trump want to buy Greenland?
The US State Department said Mr Pompeo and Mr Kofod had a friendly phone call on Wednesday about the "postponement" of the president's trip.

"The secretary expressed appreciation for Denmark's co-operation as one of the United States' allies and Denmark's contributions to address shared global security priorities," spokeswoman Morgan Ortagus said in a statement. "The secretary and Foreign Minister Kofod also discussed strengthening co-operation with the Kingdom of Denmark - including Greenland - in the Arctic."

Mr Kofod said the talks had affirmed a strong bond between the two countries.

The US and Denmark "are close friends and allies with long history of active engagement across globe," he wrote on Twitter.

How did we get here?
While praising Denmark as a "very special country", Mr Trump said in a tweet on Tuesday that his planned visit would no longer go ahead because Ms Frederiksen had "no interest in discussing the purchase of Greenland".

Mr Trump had earlier confirmed reports that he was interested in buying the autonomous Danish territory.

Speaking to reporters on the White House lawn on Wednesday afternoon, he took umbrage at Ms Frederiksen calling his plans "absurd".

"I thought that the prime minister's statement that it was absurd, that it was an absurd idea was nasty," he said. "I thought it was an inappropriate statement. All she had to do is say no, we wouldn't be interested."


Media captionDenmark called Trump's bid to buy Greenland "absurd" - he called that "nasty" and offensive to the US.
"She's not talking to me. She's talking to the United States of America. You don't talk to the United States that way, at least under me," he added.

Earlier on Wednesday, Ms Frederiksen had told reporters the idea of selling the resource-rich Arctic island had "clearly been rejected" by its leader, Kim Kielsen, "a position I share of course".
